THE MINI 
(c) Yes. The 


replacement 


medium term objective of National 
levels by 2010, through vigorou 
strategies. TFI 
has declined to 2.7 in 2007 (as per Sample Regi 
states have already achieved the replacement 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Punjab, Karnataka, 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Pu 


Gujarat, J&K, Haryana and Orissa, are quite cl 


have attaine 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, may not be able to act 


these states have TFR ranging from 3.1 to 3.9 as 


Efforts on Population stabilization very mu: 


ISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI GHULAM NABI AZAD): (a) to 


Population Policy 2000 is to bring the TFR to 


is implementation of inter-sectoral operation 


R which was 3.2 in 2000 i.e. at the time of adoption of National Population Policy 


stration Survey-SRS). 14 States/UTs out of 35 
level TFR of 2.1 viz., Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Goa, 
ducherry and Sikkim. 5 States namely Assam, 


lose to achieving the replacement level as they 


TFR between 2.3 to 2.7. Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 


ieve the replacement level in the near future as 


per SRS 2007. 


ich require strengthening of the primary health 


care system as there is a very strong correlation 
Rate and Infant Mortality Rate to the population 
Population Policy, 2000 the Government has 


etween health indicators like Maternal Mortality 


stabilization. As such in line with the National 


launched the National Rural health Mission 


(NRHM) on 12th April, 2005 throughout the country to address the strengthening of primary 


health care system. The approach to population 


quality health services in remote rural areas alon 


stabilization under NRHM is providing through 


g with a wide range of contraceptive choices to 


meet the unmet demands for these services which includes delivery, safe abortions, treatment of 


reproductive tract infections and Family Planning Services while ensuring full reproductive 


choices to women. 


Improving CGHS scheme 


13754. SHRIRAM JETHMALANI: 
SHRI SHIVANAND TIWARI: 


Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY Wi 
(3) whether it is a fact that wide improvem 


(b) ifso, t 


improvement in the scheme; and 


(c) if so, 


medical facility is available at present? 


THE MINISTI 
(c) At present CGHS facilities are available in 2 
process, however, the following initiatives have 


ly. 


more user friend 


ELFARE be pleased to state: 


ents are required in CGHS; 


e facts in this regard and whether Government has prepared any outline for the 


the details thereof and the total number of cities in the country where this 


ER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI GHULAM NABI AZAD): (a) to 


5 cities. Improvement of CGHS is a continuous 


been taken by the CGHS to make its services 


tOriginal notice of the question was received in Hindi. 


127 


@ 


ai) 


ii’) 


(५) 


(५) 


Wi) 


(il) 


(vii) 


(x) 


@) 


(20) 


Commencement of computerisation of CGHS. It has been completed in Delhi and will 


be extended in other cities in a phased manner. 


In order to provide more options for treatment in private hospitals for CGHS 
beneficiaries, CGHS introduced the scheme of “Continuous Empanelment Scheme” 
whereby private hospitals and diagnostic centres which fulfilled the terms and 
conditions for empanelment and accepted the rates fixed for that city were 
empanelled under CGHS after being recommended by the Quality Council of India. 


This scheme has now been discontinued. 


It has been decided that private hospitals/diagnostic centres to be empanelled under 
CGHS should have NABH/NABL accreditation. 


As there was hardly any hospital in the list of empanelled hospitals providing 
treatment to CGHS beneficiaries who are cancer patients, instructions have been 
issued to authorities to give permission to cancer patients in any hospital providing 
treatment for cancer patients and reimbursement made as per rates for year 
2001-02. 


As no private hospital/diagnostic centre was willing to be empanelled under CGHS, 
in Mumbai, Shillong and Thiruvananthapuram, instructions have been issued to 
permit CGHS beneficiaries, in these three cities, to get treatment in any hospital and 


get reimbursement as per the rates fixed for that city. 


A pilot project has been introduced in CGHS Delhi to place indents directly on 
manufactures for supply of drugs on rate contract basis. This has resulted in most of 
the beneficiaries in these dispensaries getting medicines on the same day. 


To tide over the shortage of medical officers in dispensaries, approval of the 
Government was conveyed to CGHS for recruiting retired medical officers on contract 
basis for a period of 2 years. 


CGHS has been holding claims adalats every year to settle any old pending unsettled 
claims. 


As part of computerisation process, it has been decided to issue plastic cards 
individually to each beneficiary of the CGHS. This will enable beneficiaries to avail 
CGHS facilities in any CGHS city after the process of computerisation and networking 
of cities is completed. 


Ministries/Departments have been delegated powers to handle all medical 


reimbursement cases if no relaxation of rules is involved. 


As there is perennial shortage of Group D staff in the CGHS, it has been decided on a 


pilot project basis to outsource cleaning work for mechanised cleaning. The existing 
Group D staff in these dispensaries have been relocated in other dispensaries where 
vacancies exist. 


128 


(xii) Due to paucity of funds, settlement of bills of private hospitals and diagnostic centres 
get delayed with the result that many private hospitals and diagnostic centres refused 
to extend credit facility to pensioner CGHS beneficiaries. To overcome the problem, 
it has been decided to engage Third Party Administrators (TPA) to processing of bills 
and release of payments electronically through a bank within a fortnight. After the 
bank makes the payment through electronic medium, it will lodge its claim in the 
CGHS to recoupment of the payments made. CGHS will then carry out medical audit 


of the bills passed for payment by the TPA. 


(xii) Two geriatric centres for CGHS beneficiaries have been set up at Timarpur and 
Janakpuri in Delhi. 


(xiv) Instructions have been issued for CGHS beneficiaries to claim reimbursement of 
expenses from two sources, first from the insurance agency if the beneficiary had 
obtained mediclaim policy and then from the CGHS for the balance amount subject 


to the condition that the reimbursement from the two sources did not exceed the 
actual expenditure and also that reimbursement from CGHS will be limited to 
package rate fixed for the treatment. 


Swine flu in school children 


+3755. SHRI ALI ANWAR ANSARI: Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE be 
pleased to state: 


(a) whether school children in Delhi are falling victim to Swine Flu/H1N1 virus and 
Government has failed to check the spread of infection; 


(b) whether cases of infection of this virus in St. Columba’s School in Delhi have 
reportedly been confirmed; 


(c) if so, the details of schedule for sanitizing and quarantising the school 
complex/children respectively as per rules; 


(9) the details of action taken in case of negligence; and 


(e) by when the school was to be closed and the details of action taken in case of 
negligence? 


THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI GHULAM NABI AZAD): (a) 
‘Yes. Government has taken all steps to check the spread of infection among the school children 
in Delhi. 


(b) One case of Pandemic Influenza A HINI infection has been confirmed in St Columba’s 
School. 


(c) The building was sanitized by the school with the assistance of local health authorities, 
the class section and its teachers/attendants were home quarantined for the remaining seven 
days period of incubation and provided preventive treatment etc. as per the guidelines. 


tOriginal notice of the question was received in Hindi. 


129 


