August 17, 1905] 


NA TURE 


39 i 


senate decided to accept the offer, to devote the whole of 
the 700 1. a year as salary to the professor, and to set 
aside a further sum of 200 1 . a year to defray the cost of 
assistants and laboratory expenses in connection with the 
chair. ” 

A day higher commercial department is to be opened 
at the end of September next in connection with the City 
of London College. The object of this department is to 
provide a higher education for those who have already 
had an ordinary secondary education. Hitherto there has 
been some basis for the charge that higher education 
has not generally induced students to regard business 
sympathetically, nor has it exhibited a commercial career 
attractively. Those engaged in higher education have 
seldom attempted to show that the study of science, 
language, and of other subjects is, or can be, related to 
the conduct of commerce, and that a commercial man will 
understand his business better if he starts with a ground¬ 
work of knowledge which has been deliberately exhibited 
to him in its relation to the conduct of ordinary business. 
Those responsible for the new scheme at the City of London 
College believe that, other things being equal, a youth who 
has been trained to see the principles which lie behind 
the facts of commerce, to know how far nature has been 
controlled by commerce, and commerce by nature; to know 
the commercial methods of his own and other nations and 
the reasons for their existence, will make a better busi¬ 
ness man than one who has had no such training. They 
believe that there is a mass of experience a judicious selec¬ 
tion from which, if assimilated, will save an English youth 
on his actual entry to commercial life from errors and 
waste of time. The experiment will be watched with great 
interest by all who are interested in the various sides of 
higher education. 


SOCIETIES AND ACADEMIES. 

London. 

Royal Society, June 8. — “ The Morphology of the Ungu¬ 
late Placenta, particularly the Development of that Organ 
in the Sheep, and Notes upon the Placenta of the Elephant 
and Hyrax. ” By R, Assheton. Communicated by 
A. Sedgwick, F.R.S. 

The formation of the placenta of the Ungulata vera 
is founded on a system of foldings of the subzonal mem¬ 
brane (or of the trophoblast only), which fit into corre¬ 
sponding grooves in the walls of the uterus, without 
thickening of the trophoblast layer of the blastocyst, and 
without destruction Of maternal epithelium or other tissue 
(Sus). Certain parts of the crests of the ridges are pro¬ 
duced by local' amplification into true villi, into which the 
splanchnopleure of the allantois subsequently extends 
(Equus, Bos, &c.). 

For this type of placentation, which is caused funda¬ 
mentally by the folding of the trophoblast, the term plicate 
is used (placenta plicata), and to this type of placentation 
it is suggested that the Cetacea, Sirenia, and Proboscidea 
conform, as well as the Ungulata vera, and possibly the 
Edentata and Prosimia. 

The term placenta cumulata is used for the type of 
placentation in which the placenta is formed by the heap¬ 
ing up or thickening of the trophoblast layer, among the 
cells of which accumulation extravasated maternal blood 
circulates. Destruction of the maternal epithelium prob¬ 
ably always occurs. To this type belong the Rodentia, 
Insectivora, the Hyracoidea, Primates, and Chiroptera. 
The Carnivora are perhaps intermediate, but, according to 
Strahl’s account, they would be distinctly plicate, while, 
according to the account of other authors, they are slightly 
cumulate. 

The morphological position of the sheep’s placenta, a 
full account of the development of which is given in the 
paper, is at that end of the series of plicate forms which 
closely approximates to the cumulate type. 

The placentation of the Ungulata shows that that order 
is more closely connected with the Proboscidea, and the 
Sirenia and Carnivora, than with other groups of 
mammals, whilst the placentation of the Hyracoidea 
suggests no connection at all with those groups, but is 
of the cumulate type, and resembles more closely the form 
found in certain of the Insectivora. 

NO. l868, VOL. 72I 


Edinburgh. 

Royal Society, July 10.—Dr. R. H. Traquair in the chair.. 
—On the bathymetry, deposits, and temperature of the 
south-western Pacific : Sir John Murray, K.C.B. The 
region discussed lay to the east and south-east of 
Australia. Seven of the soundings were in depths exceed¬ 
ing 4000 fathoms and three in depths exceeding 5000 
fathoms. Interesting comparisons were made between the 
bathymetric charts and the temperature charts, and inform¬ 
ation was also derived from the study of more than 1000 
samples of deposits. Globigerina ooze covered about 48 per 
cent., and red clay about 44 per cent, of the bottom, the 
remaining 8 per cent, being covered by other deposits. 
The percentage of carbonate of lime was low in very deep 
water and in shallow water near islands not bordered by 
coral reefs. In moderately deep water and in shallow 
water where the deposit was coral mud, the percentage 
of carbonate of lime was high. The evidence seemed to 
point to a continent in the making rather than to a sunken 
continent.—The varying form of the stomach, in man and 
the anthropoid ape: Prof. D. J. Cunningham. The 
paper was a detailed discussion of the anatomy of the 
stomach, its changes of form and position at various 
stages of digestion, the functions of the different parts, and 
the movements by which digestion was carried out.—-The 
evaporation of musk and other substances : John Aitken. 
The question was as to the nature of the exhalation or 
emanation which produced the characteristic odour; was 
it solid or vapour? The test applied was the cloud-pro¬ 
ducing power in a region saturated with water vapour and 
suddenly cooled. Experiment showed that when the air 
was purified of dust particles, but full of musk eman¬ 
ations and wv;er vapour, a sudden cooling produced no 
cloud. Therefore the emanation must itself be vapour 
and not solid. The same result was obtained with many 
other substances, such as spices, chemicals, herbs, and 
flowers, not one of them giving off solid particles. 
Evidence was adduced that the dusts of these substances 
affected the branch of the fifth nerve which serves the 
nostrils, while the olfactory nerve was sensitive to matter 
in the gaseous form. 

July 17.—Lord McLaren in the chair.—On some points 
in the geometry of reflecting telescopes with graphical 
solutions : Dr. James Hunter. The real problem in the 
construction of an efficient reflecting telescope is to find 
the best size of small mirror and the best position for it, 
so that the maximum of light and of definition is gained. 
This the paper discussed in detail, and gave a simple 
graphical construction by which the required data could 
be obtained to an approximation sufficient for practical 
purposes.—Some general principles of absorption spectro¬ 
photometry, and a new instrument : James R. Milne. 
The necessary conditions for the photometric comparison 
of two patches of light, of which one is produced by a rav 
passing through an absorbing medium, were fulfilled as 
follows :—(1) By use of a small hole instead of a slit in 
the collimator a strictly parallel beam of light was secured. 
(2) By use of a naked flat acetylene flame, the beam was 
obtained of equal intensity across a normal section, a 
condition unrealisable by electric arc or lime-light unless 
heavily screened. (3) By means of a double image prism 
replacing the ordinary eye-piece of the spectrophotometer 
telescope it was found possible (a) to bring the two patches 
of light presented to the eye accurately edge to edge, 
(b) to have these patches of some width, namely, that of 
the telescope objective, (c) to secure the coplanarity of 
the two “ faces ” of rays which proceed from each point 
of the edge common to the two patches. The instrument 
constructed on these lines could also be used as a spectro¬ 
meter or as a spectropolarimeter for measuring optical 
rotations.—Note on some generally accepted views regard¬ 
ing vision : Dr. W. Peddie. The note referred to some 
observations on the effect of fatigue in the eye in relation 
to its power of judging of colour.—On the opacity of 
aluminium foil to the ions from a flame : George A. 
Cars a. The experiments were made in the Cavendish 
Laboratory, and showed that the aluminium foil was 
quite opaque to the ions, a result not in agreement with 
results described by Lebon.—On deep sea-water waves : 
Lord Kelvin. This was a continuation of a paper read 
last January. By use of Lord Rayleigh’s method of 


© 1905 Nature Publishing Group 






392 


NA TURE 


[August 17, 1905 


ultimate intersections, a correct diagram was obtained 
of ship waves in deep and broad water, an approximate 
representation of which had been given in 1887 (see 
“Popular Lectures and Addresses,” vol. iii.). The 
numerical calculations and drawings were made by Mr. 

J. de Graaff Hurster.—On the periods and nodes of Lochs 
Earn and Trieg: Prof. Chrystal and E. Maclagan 
Wedderburn. This was a detailed comparison of the 
observed periods and nodes with those calculated from 
the hydrodynamical theory as already given by Prof. 
Chrystal. The bottom contours were approximated to by 
piecing together appropriate parabolic functions of. the 
depth; the results of theory and of observation were in 
good agreement, especially as regards the periods, which 
are less influenced by local conditions than the node¬ 
positions or the amplitudes.—A regular fortnightly explor¬ 
ation of the plankton of the two Icelandic lakes, Thing- 
vallavatn and Myvatn : C. N. Ostenfeld and Dr. C. 
Wesenberg-Lund. —Note on the boiling points of solu¬ 
tions: S. N. Johnson. It was found that the boiling- 
point elevation constant C, as calculated from the formula 
Cw\l + [n - i)a| = wWi?, 

where m is the molecular weight of salt used, W the 
weight of solvent, w the weight of salt added, a the 
ionisation constant, n the number of. free ions, and 
e the observed elevation of temperature, had widely 
differing values. The discrepancies clearly arose from 
the difficulty of getting the boiling point of the solvent. 
When, however, C was calculated from the formula 
when for e and w are substituted the increments Ae and 
Aw, as one passes from solution of lower to solution of 
higher concentration, satisfactorily concordant results were 
obtained. The salts studied were the nitrate, chlorate, 
chloride, and bromide of potassium, and the nitrate and 
chloride of sodium.—The oxidation of manganese by per- 
sulphates : Dr. Hugh Marshall.— Influence of cross 
magnetisation on the relation between resistance and 
magnetisation in nickel : Dr. C. G. Knott. The decrease 
of resistance of a strip of nickel foil when magnetised 
transversely to its length was numerically increased when 
the foil was set in a steady magnetic field magnetising it 
longitudinally, while the increase of resistance accompany¬ 
ing the application of this longitudinal field was 
numerically decreased when the foil was set in a steady 
field magnetising it transversely. 

Paris. 

Academy of Sciences, August 7.—M.. Borquet de la 
Grye in the chair.—Observations of the planet Y.R. 
(Goertz) made with the large equatorial of the Observatory 
of Bordeaux : E. Esclangon. Observations of this 
planet were made on July 29 and 30, and the results are 
given, together with the mean positions of the comparison 
stars, and the apparent positions of the planet.—On the 
sidereal day : A. Pansiot. —On continued algebraic frac¬ 
tions : M. Auric.- —On similitude in the motion of fluids : 
M. Jouguet. —On the state of matter in the neighbour¬ 
hood of the critical point : C. Raveau. A criticism on a 
recent paper on the same subject by MM. G. Bertrand and 
J. Lecarme. The author contests the views put forward 
by these authors, and notes that a consequence that they 
have deduced is a peculiarity of which a complete account 
is rendered by the ordinary kinetic theory of gases.—On 
magnetic double refraction. Some new active liquids : 
A. Cotton and H. Mouton. A solution of dialysed iron 
prepared by the method of Bravais undergoes a marked 
change when heated for some time at ioo° C. The double 
refraction in a magnetic field became greater, four hours’ 
heating making the double refraction forty times its 
original value; the size of the particles was clearly in¬ 
creased by the heating. Colloidal solutions of iron were 
also prepared by the method indicated by Bredig for the 
precious metals. This solution was doubly refracting also, 
but the variation with the strength of the field followed 
a different law to the Bravais solution. A solution of 
iron prepared by the Bredig method in glycerine was also 
examined. Solutions were also found exhibiting magnetic 
double refraction which did not contain iron, but minute 
crystals of calcium carbonate. Reason is shown for sup¬ 
posing that for these effects to be observed the size of the 
separated particles must lie between certain limits.—On 
the chloroborates of calcium : L. Ouvrard.— Study of the I 

NO. 1868, VOL. 72] 


constitution of unsymmetrical dipara-ditolylethane, of the 
dihydride of 2:7:9: 10-tetramethylanthracene and of 
2 : 7-dimethylanthracene : James Lavaux.— On the absorp¬ 
tion spectrum of manganous salts : P. Lambert. The 
manganese salts used in the research were purified with 
especial care from iron, since the spectrum of the latter 
element in the ultra-violet was found to interfere. A 
diagram is given of the manganese bands for wave-lengths 
between 557 and 394.—-The thermochemistry of the 
hydrazones : Ph. Landrieu. The reaction between some 
ketones and aldehydes has been determined directly in the 
calorimeter, and the values thus found compared with those 
deduced from the heats of combustion determined with the 
Berthelot bomb. The results of the two methods show a 
fair agreement.—The mechanical properties of iron in 
isolated crystals : F. Osmond and Ch. Fremont. The 
experiments were made upon crystals of a volume of 
several cubic centimetres, and included measurements of 
the extension, compression, hardness, and bending. It 
was found that the mechanical properties of iron in crystals 
are a function of the crystallographic orientation. The 
fragility, very great in the plane of cleavage, is, contrary 
to the views generally held, associated with great plasticity 
in the other directions.—The classification and nomen¬ 
clature of the arable earths according to their mineralogical 
constitution : H. Lagratu. —On the reddening of the vine 
leaf : L. Ravaz and L. Roos. A study has been made 
from the chemical standpoint of the non-parasitic redden¬ 
ing of the leaf of the vine. The results confirm the theories 
of Boehm and some other authors on the solution and 
migration of the carbohydrates in the leaf.— Sterigmato- 
cystis nigra and oxalic acid : P. G. Charpentier. Oxalic 
acid is a product of the growth of this mould when culti¬ 
vated in Raulin’s solution, and is still produced when the 
tartaric acid of this solution is replaced by sulphuric acid. 
But if the Raulin’s solution is deprived of sugar, and the 
tartaric acid is the only source of carbon, then oxalic acid 
is not formed.—On the mending of wounds in cartilage 
both from the experimental and histological points of view : 
V. Corni l and Paul Coudray. —On accommodation and 
convergence in binocular vision : L 4 on Pigreon. —The 
geological structure of the central Sahara : Emile Haug. 


CONTENTS. PAGE 

The Mathematics of Naval Strategy and Tactics. 

By Sir W, H. White, K.C.B., F.R.S.361 

The Correspondence of Huygens. By J. L. E. D. . 362 

Psychiatry.363 

Our Book Shelf :— 

Osterhout: “ Experiments with Plants”.364 

Ostwald : “ Conversations on Chemistry.”—A. S. . 364 
Bali: “ Mathematical Recreations and Essays ” . . . 364 
Letters to the Editor:— 

The Rate of Formation of Radium.—Hon. R. J. 

Strutt, F.R.S. .... 365 

The Effect of Radium on the Strength of Threads.— 
Hilda P. Martin and Prof. W. B. Morton . . 363 
American Research in Asia. {Illustrated.) By Prof. 

Grenville A. J. Cole ... 366 

Habits of Birds. ( Illustrated,.) By R. L. .... 367 
The South African Meetin g of the British Association 368 
Inaugural Address by Prof. G. H. Darwin, M.A., 
LL.D,, Ph.D., F.R.S., President of the Associa¬ 
tion. Part 1 .368 

Section A.—Mathematics and Physics.—Opening 
Address by Prof. A. R. Forsyth, Sc.D., LL.D., 
Math.D., F.R.S., President of the Section . 372 
Section B.—Chemistry.—Opening Address by G. T. 
Beilby, President of the Section. (Illustrated.) . 378 

Notes.384 

Our Astronomical Column :— 

The Planet Mars.388 

The Rings of Saturn . .. 388 

Declinations of Certain North Polar Stars.388 

The Minor Planet Ocllo (475).388 

The Royal University Observatory of Vienna .... 388 

The State and the Clayworker ......... 388 

The Cerebellum : its Relation to Spatial Orientation 
and Locomotion. By Sir Victor Horsley, F.R.S. 389 

University and Educational Intelligence. 390 

Societies and Academies.391 


© 1905 Nature Publishing Group 


















