279 Written Answers 


not sell his produce outside the State, since the 
Cotton Monopoly Procurement Scheme is in 
existance. However, this Scheme is also sched- 
uled to end by 30th June, 1995. 


गुजरात में हथकरघा क्षेत्र के विकास हेतु प्रस्ताव 

2376. श्रीमती आनन्दीबेन जेञाभाई पटेल: क्या वस्त्र 
मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कि: 

(क) क्या सरकार को गुजरात में हथकरघा क्षेत्र के 
विकास के संबंध में गुजरात सरकार से कोई प्रस्ताव प्राप्त 
हुआ है; | 

(ख) यदि हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है; और 

(ग) इस संबंध में सरकार द्वारा अब तक क्या कार्रवाई 
की गई है? 

वस्त्र मंत्री ( श्री जी. वेंकटस्वामी) : (क) जी, हां। 

(ख) और (ग) गुजरात राज्य सरकार से प्राप्त प्रस्तावों 
के आधार पर गुजरात राज्य को हथकरघा क्षेत्र के विकास 
के लिए वर्तमान योजनाओं के अंतर्गत ad 1994-95 के 


दौरान 22 मार्च, 1995 तक निम्नलिखित राशि जारी की 
गई :-- 


योजनाएं, जारी की गई राशि 
(लाख रुपयों में) 

1. Benen विकास baat रंगाई 
'इकाईयों की स्थापना। 14.29 
2. जनता कपड़ा अनुदान 147.15 
3. हैक यार्न मूल्य अनुदान योजना 15.48 
4. विपणन विकास सहायता/विशेष छूट योजना. 15.51 
5. प्रोजेक्ट पैकेज योजना | 16.00 
6. एकौकृत हथकरघा ग्राम विकास योजना. 32.00 
7. faqe ms योजना 3.614 
8. स्वास्थ्य पैकेज योजना 4.60 
9. रष्ट्रीय रेशम सूत बैंक योजना... 4.25 


10. निस्‍्सहाय बुनकरों के लिए मार्जिन मनी 1.56 


254.454 


, Textile Quota Integration Policy of U.S.A. 


“2377.:SHRE GHUFRAN AZAM: Wilf fe - 


2" Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state: 


{28 MAR. 1995] 


to Questions 270 


(a) whether Government have been told that 
India would benefit in the long run by the pro- 
posed textile quota integration policy of the 
United States of America; 


(b) whether a serious apprehension prevails 
amongst Indian garment exporters on the ad- 
verse impact to be c¥eated by the above policy 
of U.S.A.; 


(c) whether Government have taken any 
decision thereon to interact with U.S.A.; and 


(d) if so, the facts and details thereof? 


THE MINISTER OF TEXTILES (SHRIG. 
VENKAT SWAMY): (a) The Agreement on 
Textiles and Clothing (ATC) included in the 
Final Act of the Uruguay Round, envisages com- 
plete integration of the textile sector into the 
multilateral framework of GATT/WTO at the 
end of a 10 year transition period. Accordingly 
the U.S. have also proposed the integration of 
their textile sector, which in the Jong run would 
help all textile exporting countries, including 
India. 


(b) No, Sir. 
(c) and (d) Do not arise. 


Diversification of Textile Exports 


2378. SHRI SURESH PACHOURI: Will 
the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state: 


(a) whether it is a fact that currently India's 
textile exports are mostly cottonbased and are 
concentrated on five to six products thereby ne- 
glecting other fabrics and products; 


(b) if so, what are the details thereof: and 


(c) what action Government propose to take 
to diversify into other fabrics and products for 
exports? 


THE MINISTER OF TEXTILES (SHRI 5 
VENKAT SWAMY).: (a) and (b) It is a fact that 
currently India's. textile exports are-mostly cot- 
ton based. This 1s because India has a strong 
cotton base; our cotton prices are generally 1255 
as compared to the mternational prices and the 
cost of production of textile products is cheaper | 


than that of the developed countries. Thus there . 


has been a concentration-of our exports on.a. : 
few cetton based items such as Blouses, Shirts, 


: T-Shirts, Dresses, Skirts etc. However, India has. 


not been neglecting other fibres and products 


- and it has been exporting substantial quantitiés 


