Exploitation of PlOs 


7280. SHRI AMIR ALAM KHAN: Will the Minister of (0४ 
pleased to state: 


RSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS be 


(a) whether any discussion has been held on the issue to exploitation of persons of 
Indian origin and protection of their human rights ; 


(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether international treaties are big hurdle in this direction; and 


(d) the efforts being made by Government to bring these issues under the purview of 
National Human Rights Commission? 


THE MINISTER OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS (SHRI VAYALAR RAVI): (a) and (०) No, 
Sir. However, reports are often received about the exploitation of overseas Indian workers at the 
hands of unscrupulous employers and intermediaries. To lay down a framework of bilateral 
cooperation to address this problem, the Government has signed labour MOUs with the major 
receiving countries like the UAE, Oman, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain and Malaysia. These MOUs also 
provide for a joint working group to resolve bilateral labour issues. 


(c) and (d) India is a party to the core international conventions on human rights 
namely — International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 7966; International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7966; International Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 966; Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women, 7979; convention on the Rights of the Child 989; Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed 
Conflict, 2000; and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, 2000. These conventions/treaties 
facilitate the protection of human rights of Indians, that includes PlOs and are in no way an 
obstacle/impediment. 


Workers returning due to work loss 


28. SHRI A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN: Will the Minister of OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS be 
pleased to state: 


(a) whether it is a fact that many Indian workers working abroad are forced to return to 
India due to loss of work in the respective countries for the last five years ; 


(b) if so, the details of above workers who returned to India from various countries for the 
last five years, year-wise, State-wise, country-wise, category-wise; and 


(c) if so, the steps taken to rehabilitate the above workers and the fund allotted and 
spend for the same in last five years, year-wise, State-wise, category-wise ? 


THE MINISTER OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS (SHRI VAYALAR RAVI): (a) Ninety 
percent Indian emigration is to the Gulf Countries. Indian workers return after the period of the 


tOriginal notice of the question was received in Hindi. 


96 


employment contract. Indian Missions in Gulf Countries have informed that there is no report 
of large scale return of Indians even in the context of the global economic slowdown. The 
report from United Arab Emirates (UAE) indicates that, though the exact figure is not 
available, about 50,000 to ,50,000 emigrants have returned because of delay in execution of 
projects. They have come on leave without pay expecting to return when the economic 


situation improves. 
(b) Such information is not maintained. 
(c) Does not arise. 
Amendment in RTI Act 
2782. SHRI T.T.V. DHINAKARAN: Will the PRIME MINISTER be pleased to state: 
(a) whether it is proposed to amend the Right to Information Act; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 


(c) whether some reservation against the proposal has been expressed by several 
quarters; and 


(d) _ ifso, in what manner it proposed to address the issue? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS (SHRI PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN): (a) to (d) The Government proposes to 


strengthen right to information by suitably amending the laws to provide for disclosure by 
government in all non strategic areas. In this regard, it is proposed to review the second 
schedule to the Right to Information Act, 2005 and make rules for more disclosure of information 
by public authorities. Government has received representations expressing doubts about the 
proposed amendments. Non-Government Organisations and social activists will be consulted on 


the proposed amendments. 
Cases forwarded to CBI by Maharashtra 
283. SHRI Y.P. TRIVEDI: Will the PRIME MINISTER be pleased to state: 


(a) the number of cases that have been forwarded to CBI for investigation by the State 
Government of Maharashtra since 200/ along with the list of such cases; 


(b) the details of such cases that have been investigated and completed so far; 
(c) the number of cases pending with CBI untouched; and 


(d) _ the details thereof? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS (SHRI PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN): (a) and (b) The State Government of 


97 


